Add info about starting a workspace from raw devfile location (#2566)
codenvy/che-docs: modules/end-user-guide/pages/starting-a-new-workspace-from-a-devfile-url.adoc

:_content-type: PROCEDURE
:description: Starting a new workspace from a devfile URL
:keywords: start-new-workspace, start-a-new-workspace, how-to-start-new-workspace, how-to-start-a-new-workspace, starting-a-new-workspace, how-to-start-workspace, how-to-start-a-workspace
:navtitle: Starting a new workspace from a devfile URL
:page-aliases:

[id="starting-a-new-workspace-from-a-devfile-url"]
= Starting a new workspace from a devfile URL

Working with {prod-short} in your browser involves multiple URLs:

* The URL of your organization's {prod-short} instance, used as part of all the following URLs
* The URL of the *devfile*
* [.underline]#The URLs for starting a new workspace#
* The URLs of your workspaces in use

With {prod-short}, you can visit a *devfile* URL in your browser to start a new workspace.

> TIP: You can also use the *Git Repo URL ** field on the *Create Workspace* page of your {prod-short} dashboard to enter the URL of a *devfile* to start a new workspace.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
pass:[<!-- vale RedHat.Spelling = NO -->]

TIP: You can also use the *Git Repo URL** field on the *Create Workspace* page of your {prod-short} dashboard to enter the URL of a *devfile* to start a new workspace.

pass:[<!-- vale RedHat.Spelling = YES -->]
```

:_content-type: PROCEDURE
:description: Starting a new workspace from a devfile URL
:keywords: start-new-workspace, start-a-new-workspace, how-to-start-new-workspace, how-to-start-a-new-workspace, starting-a-new-workspace, how-to-start-workspace, how-to-start-a-workspace
:navtitle: Starting a new workspace from a devfile URL
:page-aliases:

[id="starting-a-new-workspace-from-a-devfile-url"]
= Starting a new workspace from a devfile URL

Working with {prod-short} in your browser involves multiple URLs:

* The URL of your organization's {prod-short} instance, used as part of all the following URLs
* The URL of the *devfile*
* [.underline]#The URLs for starting a new workspace#
* The URLs of your workspaces in use

> With {prod-short}, you can visit a *devfile* URL in your browser to start a new workspace.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
With {prod-short}, you can open a *devfile* URL in your browser to start a new workspace.
```

pass:[<!-- vale RedHat.Spelling = NO -->]

> TIP: You can also use the *Git Repo URL** field on the *Create Workspace* page of your {prod-short} dashboard to enter the URL of a *devfile* to start a new workspace.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
TIP: You can also use the *Git Repo URL ** field on the *Create Workspace* page of your {prod-short} dashboard to enter the URL of a *devfile* to start a new workspace.
```

pass:[<!-- vale RedHat.Spelling = YES -->]

.Prerequisites

* Your organization has a running instance of {prod-short}.
* You know the FQDN URL of your organization's {prod-short} instance: `pass:c,a,q[{prod-url}]`.

.Procedure

To start a new workspace from a devfile URL:

. Optional: Visit your {prod-short} dashboard pages to authenticate to your organization's instance of {prod-short}.

. Visit the URL to start a new workspace using the basic syntax:
[source,subs="+quotes,+attributes,+macros"]
+
----
pass:c,a,q[{prod-url}]#__<devfile_url>__
----
+
[TIP]
====
You can extend this URL with optional parameters:
[source,subs="+quotes,+attributes,+macros"]
----
pass:c,a,q[{prod-url}]#__<devfile_url>__?__<optional_parameters>__ <1>
----
<1> See xref:optional-parameters-for-the-urls-for-starting-a-new-workspace.adoc[].
====
+
.A URL for starting a new workspace
====

`pass:c,a,q[{prod-url}#https://raw.githubusercontent.com/che-samples/cpp-hello-world/main/devfile.yaml]`

====
+
[TIP]
====

> You can pass Personal Access Token to the URL to have access to private repositories:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can pass your Personal Access Token to the URL to have access to private repositories:
```

[source,subs="+quotes,+attributes,+macros"]
----
pass:c,a,q[{prod-url}]#__https://__<token>__@__<host>__/__<path> <1>
----

> <1> See xref:using-a-git-provider-access-token.adoc[].

Reviewer: @vinokurig, because the xref'd page describes a procedure that involves creating a Secret, I suggest replacing this `xref` with just saying that this is a Personal Access Token generated on the Git provider's website. 

Maybe something like:
```suggestion
<1> Your Personal Access Token that you generated on the Git provider's website.
```

This works for GitHub, GitLab, Bitbucket, Microsoft Azure, and other providers that support Personal Access Token.

> ====

Reviewer 3: great job @vinokurig  :+1:  smth. we discussed with @l0rd today that the PAT in URL feature really shines  when we use it together with the remotes attribute `?remotes={<git-repo-url>}` and configured SSH key:

- user has a private repo with devfile hosted on some unsupported provider e.g. gogs
- user configures ssh key for this provider 
- user starts workspace using the URL with token for basic auth and remote attribute:

`pass:c,a,q[{prod-url}]#__https://__<token>__@__<host>__/__<path>?remotes={<git-repo-url>}`

- SUCCESS: che server resolves devfile + project is cloned (using ssh) correctly after workspace startup

I believe we can document this in a separate PR and introduce dedicated section in the docs as part of https://github.com/eclipse/che/issues/21951

+

> After you enter the URL to start a new workspace in a browser tab, it renders the workspace-starting page.
> +
> When the new workspace is ready, the workspace IDE loads in the browser tab.
> +
> The workspace has a unique URL: `pass:c,a,q[{prod-url}]#workspace__<unique_url>__`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
.Verification

After you enter the URL to start a new workspace in a browser tab, it renders the workspace-starting page. When the new workspace is ready, the workspace IDE loads in the browser tab. 

The workspace has a unique URL: `pass:c,a,q[{prod-url}]#workspace__<unique_url>__`.
```

[TIP]
====

> Although this is not possible in the address bar, you can add a URL for starting a new workspace as a bookmark by using the browser bookmark manager:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
You can not bookmark a URL for starting a new workspace in the address bar, but you can create the bookmark by using the browser bookmark manager instead:
```

* In Mozilla Firefox, go to *☰* *>* *Bookmarks* *>* *Manage bookmarks Ctrl+Shift+O* *>* *Bookmarks Toolbar* *>* *Organize* *>* *Add bookmark*.

* In Google Chrome, go to *⋮* *>* *Bookmarks* *>* *Bookmark manager* *>* *Bookmarks bar* *>* *⋮* *>* *Add new bookmark*.
====
[IMPORTANT]
====

> The devfile must contain a project info in its content, to initiate a clone of the Git repository in the filesystem of the new workspace.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To initiate a clone of the Git repository in the filesystem of the new workspace, the devfile must contain project info.
```
